[Music] Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger, and today
we're going to talk about how our approach to
arithmetic so far in this foundational series
for mathematics connects with primary school
mathematics education. Certainly, we do not want
primary school students learning mathematics in
the way that I have been formulating it
in this series because that's meant for
a very mathematically mature audience. But
nevertheless, it gives us some good hints.
So let's start off with our first and most
important subject, the natural numbers. Now,
I've already emphasized before that there are
really three different levels at which we can
introduce natural numbers: first as strings
of ones, then in a sort of simplified Roman
system using Roman numerals (X's, C's,
and M's, and so on), and then finally,
more sophisticatedly, the Hindu-Arabic notation
that we traditionally use. I think it's important
to distinguish these different approaches
and to try to get very young students,
perhaps preschool students, thinking in terms
of this representation of natural numbers
rather than this. Students don't have to learn
one, two, three when they're three years old,
but they can learn to represent a group of
objects by a string of ones. That's very natural.
Then we discuss the operations, the primary
operations of addition and multiplication,
and the secondary operations of subtraction and
division. I think one of the main points is that
we really need students to have lots of practice
in making these operations. Calculators, I've
mentioned a few times, are not required;
they're not even advised. Students should
learn to do calculations in their heads and
on paper, and they should do lots of them.
The laws that these operations satisfy
need to be very clearly enunciated and
they need to be justified even for primary school
education. Long division is certainly necessary;
all students must learn how to long
divide. Finally, it's very natural
to give examples of arithmetic coming from
number theory and combinatorics. In this way,
we enrich students' experience of mathematics and
prepare them for further work. So those are points
that I would suggest when we develop a curriculum
for natural numbers for primary school education.
The most important subject in primary school
mathematics education is fractions. Fractions
can be introduced in a number of ways,
and I think for primary school students,
a really good way is to think about little squares
representing natural numbers. If we do that,
then the numbers one, two, and three are
represented by little strips of squares,
and when we do it that way with a two-dimensional
aspect, then describing fractions becomes
relatively simple and straightforward. So this
fraction, half, can be conveniently represented
by taking a half of one of these little squares,
or 2/3 by dividing it into three and taking 2/3.
Here, for example, are three squares that would
be the number three, and the number 3/2 would be
represented by that portion of that, and you can
see physically that that is equal to the three
halves that we had there. I would generally
avoid the usual pie-type pictures where we
divide a circle into equal numbers of pieces. The
reason is that it's actually very hard to divide
a circle evenly into, say, seven pieces; even
theoretically, that's a very hard thing to do,
and I don't think it really corresponds as
well to intuition as a linear representation.
Here's another way of connecting what we've been
talking about in terms of fractions with what you
can do in primary school. Here's a part of the
Cartesian plane with seven in this direction,
three in this direction. So that's the ordered
pair of 7 and 3, and we said that if you have
a fraction like 7/3, you could associate it
with this ordered pair (7,3) or also with the
line from the origin to that point. Now, the
squares that we were talking about up there
can very happily be represented by a strip.
This strip right here lies above the x-axis,
one unit high. Our line representing 7/3
intersects that strip right at this point here,
and if we allow that to cut off a little
rectangle, then that is the rectangle that
in this context corresponds to 7/3. So in this
way, fractions correspond to parts of this strip
which is one unit high, and that gives fractions
a pleasant two-dimensional context. It's also,
again, important to explain how the
operations on fractions come from the
more simple and basic operations on
numbers. And to emphasize once again,
it's absolutely crucial that students have lots
of practice without any calculators in actually
performing operations with fractions. These form
the basis for all facility with algebra later on,
and even at the university level, we often see
students that just don't have enough facility with
arithmetic with fractions. So the primary school
level, that's the place where that has to be done.
After students gain some facility with
fractions, we can introduce integers,
and I think it's quite reasonable
to use an integer number line in
the standard way to represent the integers.
The rational numbers are much like fractions,
and I think it's better to think about them
in a two-dimensional context rather than in
a one-dimensional context. So I prefer that you
do not think in terms of a rational number line,
but rather in terms of a rational number strip.
That's a strip that extends in both directions and
is one unit high. In this way, a rational number
which is positive is represented by a rectangle
going off to the right, starting from zero, and
we can represent that very conveniently by not
just putting the rectangle in but also showing
the line through the origin that is represented
by that (7,3) out there somewhere. So that's a
nice way of representing the rational number 7/3:
by a rectangle of height 1 with 7/3 with a line
going from bottom left to top right. That way,
a negative rational number, for example, -5/4,
can be represented also by a square, but this
time with a line going from bottom right to top
left, representing the line that goes to the -5/4.
A few extra points: The decimal numbers,
which we have not yet introduced (we will be
talking about them later after we've done some
geometry), are generally a more advanced topic
and somewhat less fundamental than fractions.
Students should learn fractions thoroughly before
they learn decimals, and I would recommend,
perhaps controversially, that decimals are
not actually studied, at least not in depth,
until post-primary school. I would also like
to point out that one should stress the relative
importance of concepts. In my quick perusal of
primary school mathematics materials, I often
find a sort of blanket coverage where there's
a lot of material, and it's not emphasized what
are actually the really main points. I think when
we organize mathematics, it's important to say
what actually is important and what is primary,
what is secondary, and what is less important.
So the objects that we've been talking about so
far are really of primary importance,
and they should play a central role.
So those are just some of my ideas. I don't
say that they should be cast in stone,
but there are ways in which our discussion of
foundational mathematics can have some say into
what primary school education might have in
it in the mathematics direction. We're almost
now at a stage where we're going to move into
geometry, the next and second important aspect
of mathematics. But before I do that, I would
like to say something about an alternate way
of thinking about natural numbers, fractions, and
so on. I want to discuss the use of infinite sets
in modern mathematics. I do not believe
in infinite sets, and in my next video,
I'm going to explain to you why and why
you shouldn't believe in them either. I
hope you'll join me for that. I'm Norman
Wildberger. Thanks for listening. [Music]